The following is an essay written for the class Introduction to Cognitive Science during my second year of university (May 2022).

///

**Emotional Memory And Learning: The Role of Provocation In Individuals’ Ability To Master And Remember**

///

**Abstract**

This paper presents a review of literature regarding emotional memory and learning. Emotions have been shown to hold a key role in individuals' ability to grasp and retain new material; specifically, their arousal serves as impetus for the manner in which thoughts and information are perceived and processed. This review emphasizes the importance of the amygdaloid complex (AC) and its associated neural mechanisms in influencing emotional memory processes through the perception of a broad spectrum of stimuli, such as unpleasant words, evocative videos, and a combination of aversive and satisfying imagery. In each case, provocative events are shown to generate greater emotional excitement than neutral ones, corresponding to enhanced memory of such experiences. The implications of the modulation of memory by the AC in moments of emotional arousal in the context of education and the development of mental models is also considered, with suggestions for future research into the subject.
*Keywords*: emotional learning, amygdaloid complex, perception, provocative stimuli, neural processes, emotional mental models.

///

**Introduction**

It comes as no surprise that emotions constitute a core element of the human condition; the tendency to apply feelings in any situation to understand one's surroundings, regulate judgment, and generate reactions–among other activities–is inherently pervasive to human functioning. This paper seeks to examine the role of emotions specifically in the context of activities surrounding the learning and short and long-term retention of new information by individuals. The effects of emotional arousal in response to stimuli of varying natures are considered, with the corresponding impacts on understanding and recall being assessed. As a result of the integral role that emotions play in almost all facets of human thought and activity, when observed through the lens of cognitive science, these processes–commonly labelled as emotional memory and learning–are inherently multi-faceted, relating to almost all of the disciplines that comprise the field. Accordingly, the literature reviewed in this paper examines emotional memory and learning in a manner that reflects the encompassing nature of this topic.

The focus of this review initially revolves around literature relating to the neuroscientific basis of the topic. Specific questions such as the impacts of neutral and arousing material, such as offensive or erotic imagery, on short and long-term memory are exploited to establish the biological basis of emotional learning and memory primarily through the observation of activity in the amygdaloid complex–a neural structure crucial for regulating processes such as emotional response and memory retention. Furthermore, the relative impacts of positive versus negative emotional provocations are investigated. The emphasis of the paper then shifts towards the cognitive psychological qualities of the topic at hand with the examination of literature pertaining to its impact in practical educational contexts and the development of cognitive representations of reality. In doing so, the paper illustrates the pragmatic, ubiquitous nature of emotional memory, as well as the potential for utilizing it as an effective apparatus in influencing cognitive development.

///

**Review**

*Neuroscientific Basis of Emotional Memory and Learning*

It is imperative to begin discussion of emotional learning and memory (EML) with an understanding of the neuroscientific basis of the subject. The importance of emotions in regulating neural functions related to memory becomes immediately apparent when viewed from an evolutionary lens. Generally speaking, provocative events, whether aversive or pleasing, bear relatively greater significance than neutral ones with regards to human survival and engagement in crucial activities such as reproduction. Naturally, the remembrance of pleasant experiential stimuli such as those encouraging procreation through sexual enticement or those that spur avoidance of potentially fatal engagements yields a biological advantage by establishing evolutionary superiority (Hamann et al., 1999). Thus, a clear impetus for emotional influence of human learning and memory becomes immediately apparent simply through rudimentary consideration of the factors aiding human survival.

As such, structures associated with facilitating EML have evolved to encourage these evolutionary advantageous behaviors. Neuroscientific research has revealed extensive evidence that the amygdaloid complex (AC) holds a central role in the regulation of the human perception of emotions, which in turn bears direct impact on affectively influenced memory processes. Taken as a whole, the neurological purpose of the AC is complex and multi-faceted: the amygdala is directly involved both with the integration of emotional phenomena to which an individual is exposed as well as the subsequent generation of an appropriate biological response to such stimuli. Studies on animal subjects that have since been confirmed by research performed on humans have revealed that the amygdala influences memory through the modulation of associated memory-related brain structures. As such, the AC acts as an orchestrator of EML: emotional arousal results in the release of stress hormones that interact with the amygdala (Hamann, 2001), which in turn regulates the medial-temporal-lobe memory system, a substructure of the brain consisting of components such as the hippocampus, which controls memory consolidation (Hamann et al., 1999). One study involving electrical stimulation of the AC revealed that excitement of the amygdaloid directly results in the “orienting reflex” phenomenon, in which an individual is forced to concoct a direct response to a rapid shift in their surroundings, and that AC lesions have the ability to regulate hormones such as glucocorticoids and adrenaline associated with memory retention (Cahill & McGaugh, 1998). Furthermore, research into the impacts of damage to the AC on the ability to engage in emotionally-based learning have only strengthened the apparent importance of the amygdaloid as the neurological foundation for EML. Patients with AC damage were unable to develop the same conditioned autonomic responses to aversive events as were subjects without damage: when subjects in one study were presented with a neutral event paired with a frightening stimuli such as a loud noise, individuals with amygdaloid damage, unlike the control subjects, failed to associate the aversive nature of the noise with the original cue (Gallagher & Chiba, 1996). These findings serve to reinforce the notion that the AC serves as the primary arbiter of emotional influences on memory by translating emotional experiences into the regulation of neural memory structures. As a result, discussion regarding EML naturally facilitates a discussion regarding the associated impacts on the AC itself.

*Context-Dependency of Emotional Memory and Learning*

While relevant research has demonstrated a clear general relationship between emotional experiences and the activation of the amygdaloid, consideration of the specific nature in which this arousal occurs when examining the nature of the stimuli and the qualities of the individual to which they are being presented is also crucial. Multiple studies have demonstrated that AC activation–or lack thereof–largely relies on the type and characterization of the material catalyzing the neurological response. In one such experiment, participants were presented with a series of images with differing affective valence and arousal ratings; the semantic content shown ranged from neutral scenes such as household objects to highly evocative pleasing and displeasing photographs, such as nude imagery and mutilated bodies, respectively. Memory recall tests conducted on the subjects both immediately after exposure to the images and one year after the experiment revealed that in both cases, stimuli rated as erotically arousing or highly disturbing to the viewer resulted in significantly improved remembrance of the content (Bradley et al., 1992). In a similar study, individuals were shown two videos–one emotionally arousing and one emotionally neutral–and asked to rate their reaction to viewing the material. A delayed test of free recall of the videos revealed results that corroborated those of the aforementioned imagery study: subjects remembered significantly more emotionally arousing films as opposed to neutral films. Moreover, a higher amygdaloid activity measured by the glucose metabolic rate of the right AC was associated with the viewing of provocative films (Cahill et al., 1996). Finally, in another study seeking to evaluate the impact of words of varying characterizations on EML, vocabulary categorized as highly unpleasant was associated with greater retention as opposed to words of other characterizations. The findings of this study also suggest that the lasting activation of the AC after presentation with unpleasant words is a product of the offensive exposure that became associated with previous emotional experiences, thereby enhancing long-term recollection of the word recognition task (Tabert et al., 2001). Each of these studies corroborates the findings that while emotionally arousing materials enhance short-term memory, the effects are especially pronounced for the long-term or delayed recollection of experiences. Furthermore, negative emotional stimuli were consistently shown to bear a greater role in the encoding and retrieval phases of explicit memory than neutral and even positive provocations, thereby resulting in amplified ability to recall such aversive experiences after an extended delay (Hamann, 2001).

However, EML is not merely contingent on the material that induces an emotionally aroused response–it has also been shown to rely on traits of the individual experiencing the event. In one study, PET scans were administered to male and female subjects following their exposure to a series of provocative and neutral scenes to determine if a significant difference in amygdaloidal response occurred. The results confirmed what had been shown by previous imaging studies: in female subjects, exposure to the arousing material was associated with a greater activation of the left amygdala; however, in male subjects, enhanced EML was correlated with increased activity in the right amygdala (Cahill et al., 2001). A similar contrast in amygdaloidal function was shown under resting conditions, thereby strengthening the proposition that the variation in AC response based on individuals’ sex is a result of differing patterns of functional connectivity in the neural structure (Kilpatrick et al., 2006). These findings suggest that individuals are biologically predisposed to have varying EML responses based on qualities such as sex. When considered in the context of emotional stimulation encountered through regular psychological interactions, this disparity can explain differences in the manners in which individuals respond to and remember provocative events. Overall, it is clear that EML is a process that is highly influenced by the dynamics inherent to the circumstances in which it is performed; thus, EML manifests itself as a derivative of context-dependent learning (Reisberg, 2019). Regardless, the research presented reinforces the importance of EML in influencing the retention capabilities of humans from a foundation rooted in neurological structure.

*Cognitive Psychological Implications of EML*

Having established the ubiquitous nature of EML in the cognitive functioning of human individuals, it now becomes necessary to examine the cognitive psychological qualities of this crucial mechanism. The pervasive nature of EML immediately lends itself to exploitation in order to improve individuals’ abilities to grasp new information by associating it with emotional arousal–as a result, educational scenarios present themselves as pragmatic opportunities for utilizing EML to improve pupils’ learning capabilities. One experiment conducted on students specifically to encourage emotional arousal in the educational process motivated emotional arousal through stimulation specifically designed to elicit an EML response. The subjects were engaged in learning sessions throughout which instructors would interact with them through mediums such as evocative visual imagery designed to target participants’ emotional excitement. The findings of the study revealed that individuals in the training routine subjected to emotionally arousing stimuli scored significantly higher on post-activity tests of cognition (Kumar & Chellamani, 2020). Additional research into student interactions in educational settings has only reinforced the importance of EML: pupils’ emotional engagement was shown to directly influence their cognitive engagement in the classroom. Emotional provocation both in the context of learning sessions with instructors and in cognitive interactions with peers revealed that increased use of EML in such settings had a strong underlying correlation with their achievement in school (Pietarinen et al., 2014). As these studies demonstrate, emotional memory and learning is not merely a phenomenon rooted in neurological abstractness–rather, it is a core element of human function that can be strategically utilized to enhance individuals’ retention, such as students’ memory of topics presented in the classroom.

EML also bears strong influence in the development of cognitive representations of reality. As defined by Vosniadou’s *Mental Models In Conceptual Development*, mental models are used to encapsulate individuals’ preexisting knowledge in addition to creating and revising theories formed during conceptual development (Vosniadou, 2002). Naturally, these mental models are susceptible to influence from emotional stimuli, which leads to the development of emotional mental models (EMMs) that bind individuals’ cognitive mental models and their emotional interactions. While a person’s mental models shape the manners in which they derive answers to inquiries not previously encountered (Vosniadou, 2002), emotional mental models shape aspects such as the reactions and behavior expressed towards certain stimuli. Thus, EML naturally holds a central role in the formation of EMMs: provocation through arousing stimuli results in the construction of conceptual frameworks of how one should perceive varying situations and subsequently express their response influenced by the relevant emotional frameworks that have been established through previous experience. The modulation of mechanisms such as EML has been shown to bear direct impact on the formation of EMMs through tasks such as the perception of various literary works of varying tones (Stangl, 2012). Thus, emotional memory bears crucial importance in the development and application of cognitive models; in some sense, the discussion of EML in the context of education is simply a real-world manifestation of its potential in influencing the mental development of individuals. Overall, this discussion of the cognitive psychological implications of EML serves to highlight its omnipresence both in the normal functioning of humans as well as the realm of cognitive science as a field.

Discussion

Emotions comprise a fundamental component of human thought processes and the manners in which individuals behave. This paper examines EML, which comprises the specific modes by which individuals’ ability to retain information varies depending upon the emotional arousal generated by stimuli that is presented to them. The literature reviewed first presents the neuroscientific basis for EML by establishing the importance of the amygdaloid and its associated neural structures in modulating memory based on emotional arousal. Next, the importance of context in EML is considered through presentation of research that demonstrates the dependence of emotional memory upon factors such as the character of the material presented–whether neutral, aversive, or pleasing–as well as the sex of the individual experiencing the phenomenon. Finally, the cognitive psychological implications of EML are considered by addressing literature demonstrating the importance of emotional memory in educational settings well as in the development of emotional mental models.

The papers reviewed immediately lend themselves to critical evaluation when considered in a holistic sense. The neurobiological explanations for AC modulation of EML such as those of Hamann (2001), Hamann et al. (1999), and Cahill et al. (1998) serve as the empirical basis upon which the practical, psychology-oriented postulations of Kumar et al. (2020) and Stangl (2012) rely. Each approach from varying subsets of the cognitive science field yields new connections between the literature presented, thereby adding context to the research discussed. The variation of emotional arousal based on the nature of stimuli presented as well as qualities such as the sex of the perceiver as investigated by Bradley et al. (1992), Cahill et al. (1996), and Kilpatrick et al. (2006) directly influence the construction of cognitive models such as the EMMs defined by Stangl (2012), since differences in provocative media and its perceiver lead to the construction of distinct behavioral frameworks in response. Finally, the findings of each paper serve to lend credence to those of the others: Gallagher et al.’s (1996) findings regarding impaired associative memory capability corroborate the conclusions drawn by Cahill et al. (1996), for example, as both demonstrate similar effects founded in emotional arousal (or lack thereof) from varying empirical viewpoints. These connections among the literature reviewed also reveal links to broader topics in cognitive science beyond those already noted in the previous review. Arguably, the relevance of EML as presented in this paper supports the arguments placed forth by those such as Searle in his refutation of Turing’s positing regarding the ability of machines to mimic human intelligence, since emotional learning inherently relies upon abstract notions such as intentionality and feelings that are impossible for machines to replicate (Searle, 1980). Due to the ubiquitous nature of emotion, EML immediately establishes itself as a crucial element of cognitive theories such as those of creativity, transfer and schemas, and psycholinguistics by influencing the mechanisms by which these sub-fields function.

The papers reviewed each provide definitive conclusions as they pertain to EML, whether through neurologically- or psychologically-based approaches. By removing confounding factors, they are able to establish the role of emotion clearly as the impetus for the modulation of memory. However, the various literatures presented also bear key limitations; namely, they focus on a specific element of EML and fail to establish direct correlations between those findings and their broader applicability. The research of Bradley et al. (1992), Cahill et al. (1996), and Tabert et al. (2001), for example, each measure amygdaloid stimulation as it pertains to one type of medium, which always relies on visual sensory input. Thus, AC activation across classes of media is not thoroughly evaluated, thereby calling into question the generalizations made by these papers regarding the influence of emotionally arousing material. Moreover, each of these studies uses relatively small sample sizes that mean the conclusions drawn do not necessarily immediately reflect the intricacies of EML captured in a broader swath of the general population. Thus, future research should focus on evaluating EML across various classes of stimuli in tandem with subjects of varying character, such as age, sex, and race, since each of these categorizations influences the emotional responses that characterize an individual’s EML. Additionally, samples should be drawn from a wide variety of populations to ensure that EML is being understood in the context of heterogeneous clusters of individuals–across demographic boundaries, for example. The literature pertaining to the psychological–and, more broadly, the readily applicable–nature of emotional memory is also relatively limited. Further research building upon that of Kumar et al. (2020) must be conducted to verify that the impacts of EML hold in a variety of educational settings, since this study faces potential limitations due to the specific manner in which emotionally provocative instruction was administered and subsequently gauged. Furthermore, additional emphasis should be placed on investigating the prevalence of EMMs; while Stangl’s (2012) work provides clear impetus for further examination, insufficient attention has been given to evolving the traditional mental models approach to accommodate these new emotionally-founded results.

Ultimately, EML presents an intriguing frontier for gaining a broader understanding of humans’ neural structures pertaining to memory, as well as for improving performance in traditional memory-intensive tasks such as student instruction. As this paper has shown, future research is imperative for facilitating greater understanding of the intricacies of emotional memory and its importance in the field of cognitive science overall.

///

**References**

Ananda Kumar, A., & Chellamani, K. (2020). Effect Of Emotive Cognition Strategies On Enhancing Meaningful Learning Among B.Ed. Student-Teachers. *Shanlax International Journal of Education*, 9(1), 152–162. https://doi.org/10.34293/education.v9i1.3488

Bradley, M. M., Greenwald, M. K., Petry, M. C., & Lang, P. J. (1992). Remembering Pictures: Pleasure And Arousal In Memory. *Journal Of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition*, 18(2), 379–390. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.18.2.379

Cahill, L., & McGaugh, J. L. (1998). Mechanisms Of Emotional Arousal And Lasting Declarative Memory. *Trends in Neurosciences*, 21(7), 294–299. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0166-2236(97)01214-9

Cahill, L., Haier, R. J., Fallon, J., Alkire, M. T., Tang, C., Keator, D., Wu, J., & McGaugh, J. L. (1996). Amygdala Activity At Encoding Correlated With Long-Term, Free Recall Of Emotional Information. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, 93(15), 8016–8021. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.15.8016

Cahill, L., Haier, R. J., White, N. S., Fallon, J., Kilpatrick, L., Lawrence, C., Potkin, S. G., & Alkire, M. T. (2001). Sex-Related Difference In Amygdala Activity During Emotionally Influenced Memory Storage. *Neurobiology Of Learning And Memory*, 75(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1006/nlme.2000.3999

Gallagher, M., & Chiba, A. A. (1996). The Amygdala And Emotion. *Current Opinion In Neurobiology*, 6(2), 221–227. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(96)80076-6

Hamann, S. (2001). Cognitive And Neural Mechanisms Of Emotional Memory. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 5(9), 394–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(00)01707-1

Hamann, S. B., Ely, T. D., Grafton, S. T., & Kilts, C. D. (1999). Amygdala Activity Related To Enhanced Memory For Pleasant And Aversive Stimuli. *Nature Neuroscience*, 2(3), 289–293. https://doi.org/10.1038/6404

Kilpatrick, L. A., Zald, D. H., Pardo, J. V., & Cahill, L. F. (2006). Sex-Related Differences In Amygdala Functional Connectivity During Resting Conditions. *NeuroImage*, 30(2), 452–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.09.065

Pietarinen, J., Soini, T., & Pyhältö, K. (2014). Students’ Emotional And Cognitive Engagement As The Determinants Of Well-Being And Achievement In School. *International Journal of Educational Research* 67, 40–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2014.05.001

Reisberg, D. (2019). *Cognition: Exploring The Science Of The Mind* (7th ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.

Searle, J. R. (1980). Minds, Brains, And Programs. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 3, 417-457.

Stangl, B. (2012). Emotional Mental Models. *Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning*, 1131–1133. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-1428-6_728

Tabert, M. H., Borod, J. C., Tang, C. Y., Lange, G., Wei, T. C., Johnson, R., Nusbaum, A. O., & Buchsbaum, M. S. (2001). Differential Amygdala Activation During Emotional Decision And Recognition Memory Tasks Using Unpleasant Words: An fMRI Study. *Neuropsychologia*, 39(6), 556–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0028-3932(00)00157-3

Vosniadou, S. (2002). *Mental Models in Conceptual Development.* Model-Based Reasoning, 353–368. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-0605-8_20
