The following is a rhetorical analysis essay written for my AP English Language and Composition class in May 2019.

///

A Journey Into the Unknown

If you’ve tuned in to the news or picked up a copy of *The New York Times* recently, you’ve no doubt heard about scientific experiments raising the possibilities of everything from robots imitating news broadcasters to gene editing for the creation of designer babies. And while it’s easy to glimpse at these discoveries and read a quick synopsis of scientists’ work, few of us truly consider the tedious labor involved or the extreme diligence necessary to actually make the discoveries CNN labels as “groundbreaking.” But in his account of the 1918 flu epidemic, *The Great Influenza*, John M. Barry reflects on the uncertainty that permeates scientific research and investigates the dubious nature of scientists’ work. By alluding to well-respected academics such as Albert Einstein and contrasting the process of scientific research to the exploration of the untouched forest, Barry characterizes the scientific process as one consumed by uncertainty.

If you’re going to write about science, why not allude to the person whom many consider to be the greatest scientist of all time: Albert Einstein? Well, Barry does just that in the very beginning of his essay as he starts to explore the make-or-break nature of scientific investigations and the courage necessary to persevere in such studies. By alluding to Einstein’s, “refusal to accept his own theory until his predictions were tested,” Barry illustrates the notion that scientists “must accept the fact that all [their] work, even beliefs, may break apart upon the sharp edge of a single laboratory finding.” Such a reference to Einstein’s methods and work ethic reinforces Barry’s characterization of scientific research as a process that is frequently unfruitful: after all, if Einstein, father of relativity, refuses to believe his hypotheses without the data to prove them, then all research--regardless of the scientist--must be totally unpredictable. But to solidify his claim that no aspect of research is set in stone, Barry includes another allusion--this time by quoting the renowned French physiologist Claude Bernard who says, “Science teaches us to doubt.” Again, by referencing an academic many in the scholastic community consider to be among the most celebrated scientists of all time, Barry appeals to authority in convincing his audience that research is precarious and by no means defined. So Barry’s allusions to Einstein and Bernard validate his argument that research is wholly uncertain--do we need any more proof beyond the words of these scientific greats?

Well, just as scientists would defend their conclusions with cold, hard data, Barry continues his characterization of scientific research as unpredictable by contrasting the ambitiousness of scientists who explore the unknown with the explorers who trek through never-before-travelled regions of forest. In fact, Barry spends almost an entire paragraph comparing the best scientists to adventurers who “move deep into a wilderness region where they know almost nothing, where the very tools and techniques needed to clear the wilderness, to bring order to it, do not exist.” Such a parallel paints researchers as trailblazers who “probe” the bounds of knowledge, seeking to expand humanity’s grasp of the world around us, much as explorers seek to uncover new forests, rivers, and wetlands. And just as wilderness venturers set the stage for others to come in and tame the wild, scientific researchers allow, “a flood of colleagues [to] pave roads over the path laid, . . . [which] will be orderly and straight.” Essentially, Barry characterizes researchers almost as conquistadors of knowledge who “conquer” the mysterious “territory” of new disciplines so that others may build on their work. Again, this portrayal allows Barry to create a contrast between researchers and explorers of the unknown, thus characterizing scientists as those pushing the bounds of what humanity knows and accepts.

Ultimately, the pioneering work of scientists isn’t so different from the efforts of discoverers such as Christopher Columbus or Lewis Clark. After all, both assume the responsibility of uncovering the unknown to the rest of us--a tall order that involves just as much uncertainty as the exploration of a new continent. So the next time you read about scientists’ discovery of a new method to fight cancer in *The New York Times*, remember what Barry teaches us: that research is truly a journey into the unknown.
