The following is an essay written for the class *Computing, Society, and Professionalism* during my first year of university (April 2021).

///

Social Media Restriction Motivated By Trends In Adolescent Depression

///

Perhaps no other event in human history has matched the seismic nature with which the technological revolution has completely redefined the manner in which human beings connect. In the span of just a few years, the advent of low-cost Internet-compatible devices has come to dominate virtually every aspect of modern life; this rapid pace of innovation has allowed for the simultaneous development of new social media platforms dedicated to facilitating communication among users. Although these developments have empowered a degree of human contact never before seen, analyses of the effects of social media suggest that the nature of the communication occurring in these venues may lead to heightened rates of mental health issues such as depression, especially among younger populations. Moreover, as a direct result of the breakneck speed at which these platforms have expanded, many traditional regulation mechanisms have failed to ensure their negative impacts are limited. This paper examines the relationship between increased rates of adolescent depression stemming from the use of social media and explores the need for restricting adolescent access to these platforms as a result. Ultimately, upon scrutiny of pertinent evidence, the associations between increasing social media use and heightened rates of depression are shown to warrant a multifaceted approach to restricting adolescent usage of these platforms.

An investigation into the effects of social media use necessitates a discussion of the rapid rate at which these platforms have expanded. In the past two decades, the user bases of the most dominant actors in this market have come to encapsulate significant portions of the world population: by the third quarter of 2013, for example, “Facebook passed 1.15 billion monthly active users, 819 million mobile users, and 699 million daily users” (Mathews & George, 2013). In the same period, other social media websites such as Twitter had approximately half a billion users, while platforms such as Instagram and Pinterest swiftly gained popularity (Mathews & George, 2013). Considering that this mass adoption has occurred in the span of less than twenty years, these websites and their international counterparts have completely transformed the fundamental nature of human communication and socialization at a pace never before seen.

Perhaps the most notable aspect of the meteoric rise of social media has been the overwhelming adolescent presence on these platforms, which continues to comprise a vital segment of their respective user bases. A study investigating social media uptake among adolescents in the United Kingdom, for example, found that in 2007--a mere three years after the release of Facebook--“42% of UK 8-17 year olds had a social network profile . . . including 55% of 13-17 year olds . . . [with] similar figures . . . in other countries.” In the same study, it was also found that among “US 13-18 year olds, . . . the average number of social networking contacts is 75” (Livingstone & Brake, 2009). More recent research demonstrates a continuation of these adoption trends: as of 2012, the percentage of adolescents utilizing social media rose to 73% (Lenhart et al., 2010), with “45% of teens [in 2018] saying they are online on a near-constant basis” (Anderson & Jiang, 2018). These figures clearly indicate the profound rate at which adolescents have endorsed social media as a prime socialization form.

In considering the reasoning behind this espousal of social networking sites (SNSs), it becomes imperative to inspect the general trends defining how adolescents have interacted with the digital environment in which they are now immersed. Traditional broadcast media that was “created . . . by an established production source . . . [and] provided either to individuals or to a broader audience for passive viewing or reading” has now been supplemented by “newer digital media” such as social networks “in which users can both consume and actively create content” (Chassiakos et al., 2016). The integration of passively-consumed media and interactive content has allowed for a transition to an environment where adolescent digital experiences are personalized and more engaging; the advent of SNSs has thus continued the deepening integration between adolescent development and digital media (Chassiakos et al., 2016). These trends reveal the reasoning for the immediate inclination of adolescents to adopt social media, since it provides a natural extension to trends that have been developing over decades.

An examination of the interactions adolescents maintain on social media provides further understanding regarding the psychological motivations for their adoption of SNSs. The adolescent phase of an individual's life primarily revolves around the formation of oneself and the establishment of relationships and friendships; the key goals of these actions are “to stand out--to develop an identity and pursue autonomy . . . and to fit in--to find comfortable affiliations and gain acceptance from peers” (Brown & Larson, 2009). SNSs have therefore provided new opportunities for adolescents to engage in self-expression: “in one-on-one communications, . . . adolescents can express their likes and dislikes as well as their worldviews and get immediate feedback,” and they may also “join Internet ‘groups’ reflecting the aspects of their identity that they wish to explore or deepen” (Spies Shapiro & Margolin, 2013). Thus, social media enables adolescents to develop their identities in addition to creating public platforms via which they may commit to various components of these identities.

The desire to formulate an identity in adolescence paired with the connection-driven environment presented by SNSs raises questions regarding how these socialization mechanisms can be exploited to target adolescents’ developmental vulnerabilities to motivate the emergence of mental health issues such as depression. The reasoning for such inquiry necessarily lies in the character of social-media-driven adolescent relationships as opposed to those connections traditionally maintained by members of this demographic in the pre-technological era. According to one study in the Netherlands, those adolescents “who communicated more often on the Internet felt closer to existing friends than those who did not, but only if they were using the Internet to communicate with friends rather than strangers” (Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, 2008). These results are indicative of broader shifts in the nature of youth relationships brought on by the uptake of SNSs--that is, while social networking enables greater communication with preexisting friend groups, the connections facilitated via these platforms are frequently superficial and thereby fail to fulfill the desire to “establish interpersonal connections,” which is “one of the most important developmental tasks of adolescence” (Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, 2008). A study conducted in 2001-02 found “teens feel less psychologically close to their instant messaging partners than to their partners in phone and face-to-face interactions” (Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, 2008). The reasoning for such lack of intimacy in these connections lies in the fundamental structure of networking websites: users are encouraged to establish online relationships with as many other individuals using the site as possible, thereby leading to “a redefinition of the word ‘friend’” that has now come to encapsulate more distant, less concrete relationships--in essence, those driven by “friends of friends” (Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, 2008). Thus, while SNSs facilitate communication that enforces connections in preexisting relationships, they also encourage adolescent users to create new social bonds that are inherently deficient in the qualities adolescents seek. This sense of unfulfillment bears direct impact on individuals’ mental health and presents a clear motivation for depression.

The adolescent presence on such platforms has also exposed teens to additional venues by which they may be socially targeted in addition to various influences which may negatively impact their health, resulting in heightened rates of depression. Cyberbullying, for example, has been shown to be “associated with more depressive symptoms than traditional bullying,” which is in large part a product of “the public and enduring nature of online posts” (Uhls et al., 2017). Multiple studies have established a connection between cyberbullying and mental health consequences, with “adolescents who experience cyberbullying both as victims and offenders [having] lower-self esteem [and] higher rates of depression” (Reid & Weigle, 2014). The constant desire to stay connected to the endeavors of connections established on SNSs has also created an attachment that has thus resulted in a lack of sleep among adolescents, which has been shown to be a direct impetus for depression. Thus, practically speaking, increased rates of social media use have contributed to both an exacerbation of traditional motivators of depression as well as new senses of attachment with direct ties to depressive symptoms.

Moreover, various studies have “found that [the] frequency of social media use played a role in the relationship between mass media and an objectified self-concept,” resulting in the peer validation and endorsement of risky behaviors (Uhls et al., 2017). Adolescents frequently come to view SNSs as a sort of “superpeer” that provides validation for engaging in dangerous actions (Reid & Weigle, 2014). One study, for example, discovered 54% of 18 year olds’ public social media profiles contained one or more references to a high-risk behavior (Moreno et al., 2009). The public nature of SNSs means that the display of involvement in risky behaviors “may encourage unwanted expectations in others” (Reid & Weigle, 2014), including distorted sexual desires in adolescents--a product of normalized references to sex on networking pages and activities enabled by social media such as “sexting.” Therefore, the new paradigm instilled by SNSs which impresses adolescents to seek connections consistently exposes these individuals to influences with established links to depressive symptoms.

An examination of the motivators for adolescent depression resulting from social media use necessitates a discussion of the closely associated psychological considerations. In one study of high school students, “a statistically significant positive correlation between depressive symptoms and time spent on [social media]” was found, “as quantified using the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II)” (Pantic, 2014). The grounds for these observations lie in the previously discussed psychological development of adolescents: the desire to establish new interpersonal relationships drives “extensive use of [social networking]” to cultivate shallow connections, which “might weaken existing close family and friend interactions and increase feelings of loneliness and depression” (Pantic, 2014). Therefore, while social media use to communicate with close friends and family has been associated with declines in depression (Bessière et al., 2010), adolescent psychology drives individuals in this demographic to exploit social networking in manners shown to result in elevated rates of depression.

Furthermore, SNS use bears direct impact on the psychosocial development of adolescents that has been shown to instigate mental health deficiencies with direct links to depression. With regards to self-esteem, there exist “several models/theories on the possible effect of computer-mediated communication” (Pantic, 2014), with no conclusive determination as to the impact of social media use on this crucial element of teen mental health. However, multiple studies have suggested that detrimental impacts on self-esteem from SNS usage can be traced to the notion that “all social networking platforms where self-presentation is the principal user activity cause or at least promote narcissistic behavior,” with one study indicating that “individuals with lower self-esteem are more active online in terms of having self-promotional content” on their social media profiles (Pantic, 2014). Heightened rates of social networking have also been correlated with elevated senses of loneliness as a product of the “fear of missing out,” or FoMO, which is instigated by the “distress regarding the possibility that others are having rewarding experiences in one’s absence” (Barry et al., 2017). Multiple studies have indicated that extensive use of social media and FoMO is correlated as a result of the absorption with feeling isolated or unpopular online. As a result of loneliness brought about by “subjective distress[ors] such as FoMO, . . . social media use may be correlated with higher anxiety and mood-related symptoms” (Barry et al., 2017), both of which portend depressive tendencies.

Thus, although the relationship between mental health problems and social media usage is not straightforward, general trends in depression have been associated with adolescent use of these platforms. For example, “a meta-analysis of 23 studies showed a correlation of problematic Facebook use and psychological distress in adolescent and young adults,” and “other systematic reviews have also found a meaningful relationship between social media use and depression” (Keles et al., 2019). A recent review of studies investigating the links between adolescent depression and SNS usage noted that behaviors such as motives for social media usage, the nature of the usage, and the desire to engage in activities such as social comparison also heavily influenced symptoms of anxiety and depression (Keles et al., 2019). Again, it is imperative to note that no definitive conclusions can be drawn regarding a causal relationship between adolescent depression and social media use (Vidal et al., 2020); rather, current literature suggests a general, multifactorial association indicative of a general trend (Karim et al., 2020).

While the specific psychological connections between SNS usage and depression are still being studied, an analysis of data from the United States found that, “rates of adolescent depression that had been relatively stable, at around 8% for over 10 years, began to rise noticeably in 2012 and have continued to rise, culminating in . . . 2015 survey results of 12.5%” (del Vecchio, 2018). Moreover, a study in the United Kingdom that inquired adolescents regarding their social media use revealed that “despite [feeling] compell[ed] . . . to be connected through their devices, . . . adolescents simultaneously recognized that such activity pressurised them and held potential risk” for depressive symptoms, with multiple subjects explicitly mentioning feelings of depression (O’Reilly, 2020). Thus, despite the lack of a straightforward psychological connection in current scientific literature, general trends in adolescent depression suggest an association between increased rates of social media use and depressive symptoms.

Having studied the links between adolescent depression and the usage of SNSs, a clear need for moderation of access to and use of these sites immediately appears as a logical conclusion. As noted previously, while these platforms do bear certain benefits for adolescents, their vulnerable, developing psychological and psychosocial state combined with the aforementioned trends in depression warrants the implementation of restrictions that can be magnified or removed as additional studies elucidate the causal nature of social media usage and depression or the lack thereof. However, a broad variety of restriction mechanisms exist for limiting teen access to these sites, and implementing an effective restriction system that ensures adolescent health is maintained requires a multifaceted approach that employs a strategic combination of these tools. Thus, an analysis of these enforcement instruments is exigent.

The first apparatus available for instituting such limitations involves legal restrictions instated by various governments and regulatory bodies. Notably, in the United States, “the main federal law regarding juveniles’ online privacy protects only youths who are under the age of 13,” with “age 13 [becoming] a cutoff in the online world in 2000 with the passage of [the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)]” (Costello et al., 2016). COPPA sought to prevent deceptive or unfair practices in the collection and utilization of personal information from children via the Internet by outlawing this form of data collection altogether (Carpenter, 2017). However, in terms of restricting adolescent access to social media in a manner that mitigates risk factors for increased rates of depression, COPPA bears critical deficiencies: “youths aged 13 to 17 are not protected by the law” even though “adolescents aged 13 to 17 are recognized as developmentally immature in other legal contexts” (Costello et al., 2016). The state of California has attempted to alleviate certain faults present in COPPA through the passage of the “Erase Bill,” which allows a “Minor”--defined to be a “natural person under 18 years of age who resides in the state” to request the removal of information and content posted on an “Internet Web site, online service, online application, or mobile application by the user” (Carpenter, 2017). However, statutes such as COPPA and the “Erase Bill” fail to provide any efficacious enforcement mechanism, which has allowed for children and adolescents to continue to engage in online activities associated with depressive symptoms as demonstrated earlier. Regardless of the legal specifics, in order to be an effective restriction mechanism, regulations must be flexible to accommodate the rapid pace of change in the technological realm in addition to increasing the power of individual users.

An alternative approach is manifested through the imposition of limitations by private corporations--in other words, the companies with direct ownership of SNSs. Such a proposition involves the deployment of moderation devices on social media sites to detect and remove risky content that motivates the depressive symptoms in adolescents browsing such platforms. One study of the effectiveness of moderator mediation found that “after examining the role of the moderator in a Web-based intervention for adolescents with depression or anxiety, . . . moderating such an intervention was feasible and resulted in no safety concerns” (Windler et al., 2019). The same study also found that “moderation has been found to foster a welcoming and safe environment, prevent cyberbullying, and may even increase respect among users” (Windler et al., 2019). Thus, restriction through moderation conducted by the private corporations owning SNSs themselves presents an opportunity to nurture a social sphere that eliminates many of the risk factors that lead to adolescent depression. However, excessive trust should not be placed in companies themselves, since efforts to combat depression resulting from social media use may conflict with their monetary goals. Perhaps most notably, in 2013, Facebook loosened privacy rules for teenagers aged 13 to 17 to make content posted by individuals in this demographic more public despite the dangers involved--largely seen as a move to satiate “marketers . . . keen to reach impressionable young consumers” (Goel, 2013). Thus, moderation by private entities presents a promising technique that should also be approached with wariness.

The final--and perhaps most comprehensive--restriction strategy relies on regulation through parental consent and moderation. Current research has consistently demonstrated that “some forms [of parental mediation] can be beneficial for children’s cognitive and social development as well as successful in mitigating negative media impacts” (Coyne et al., 2017), especially those with clear links to detrimental mental health consequences. Furthermore, a recent empirical study found that “whenever any kind of parental control over Internet use was reported, [Internet Addiction]”--a key symptom of social-media-induced depression--“was less likely to occur” (Martins et al., 2020). Pertinent scientific literature categorizes this parental moderation into two forms: restrictive and active media monitoring. While restrictive monitoring “involves parents setting rules or limits on children’s media use,” active monitoring “is used to promote education and critical thinking regarding media and typically occurs as parents discuss the media and its content with their children” (Padilla-Walker et al., 2017). While both approaches have been shown to decrease depressive symptoms in adolescents as a result of social media use, in practice, the dialogue-founded and educationally-based strategy fostered by active media monitoring has been shown to be more effective than the stringent limitations imposed through restrictive media monitoring (Padilla-Walker et al., 2017). Overall, however, the intimate nature of parent-child relationships implies that parental mediation presents the most effective method to curtail adolescent use of social media as it relates to associations with depression.

Having investigated the connections between increased rates of adolescent depression stemming from the use of social networking sites and explored the available options for restricting access to such platforms, it can be conclusively stated that the trends and motivators of adolescent depression warrant the implementation of such measures. As noted in previous discussions throughout this paper, SNSs offer broad opportunities for individuals in the adolescent age range to socialize and interact, which comprises a crucial aspect of their development (Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, 2008). However, even in the absence of current scientific literature capable of drawing a direct causal relationship between SNS usage and depression among adolescents, the analyses presented in this paper combined with general societal trends indicate at least some correlation that cannot be overlooked (Keles et al., 2019).

Thus, restrictions should be placed on adolescent access to social media to combat depression resulting from SNSs. The practical, psychological, and psychosocial impetuses for depression derived from social media usage necessarily requires a multifaceted strategy encompassing all of the restriction mechanisms examined previously: legal statutes, platform content control, and parental consent and moderation. Legal restrictions must adequately protect adolescents in online social environments beyond the safeguards instituted by laws such as COPPA by maintaining flexibility to enable adaptation to the rapidly maturing Internet-based landscape (Costello et al., 2016). Moreover, legal enactments should strive to serve as the foundation for instigating additional action--including enforcing content moderation of SNSs by private entities and implementing additional protections to ensure vulnerable adolescents cannot access risky content--beyond the specific points they contain. Finally, parental moderation techniques such as active media monitoring should be encouraged to enable greater dialogue between adults and adolescents regarding their interactions on social media to restrict them from potentially detrimental engagements (Coyne et al., 2017).

Ultimately, the discussions of this paper as they pertain to adolescent depression relating to social media use and the restriction of such utilization explore ethical issues that are actively evolving in modern society. As additional research emerges regarding the adolescent presence on SNSs, the aforenoted conclusions should be revised to incorporate these new understandings. However, with the analyses presented earlier, it is clear that the time for combatting adolescent depression resulting from increased social media use is now.

///

References

Anderson, M., Jiang, J. (2018, May 31). Teens, *Social Media & Technology 2018*. Internet & Technology. https://www.pewresearch.org internet/2018/05/31/teens-social-media-technology-2018/.

Barry, C. T., Sidoti, C. L., Briggs, S. M., Reiter, S. R., & Lindsey, R. A. (2017). Adolescent Social Media Use and Mental Health from Adolescent and Parent Perspectives. *Journal of Adolescence*, *61*, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2017.08.005

Bessière, K., Pressman, S., Kiesler, S., & Kraut, R. (2010). Effects of Internet Use on Health and Depression: A Longitudinal Study. *Journal of Medical Internet Research*, *12*(1). https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1149

Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer Relationships in Adolescence. *Handbook of Adolescent Psychology*, *2*(1), 74–103. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470479193.adlpsy002004

Carpenter, E. (2017). How Social Media is Affecting the Lives of Minors Including Current Legal Safeguards and their Weaknesses. *Child and Family Law Journal*, *5*(1), 75–96.

Chassiakos, Y. R., Radesky, J., Christakis, D., Moreno, M. A., & Cross, C. (2016). Children and Adolescents and Digital Media. *Pediatrics*, *138*(5), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-2593

Costello, C. R., McNiel, D. E., & Binder, R. L. (2016). Adolescents and Social Media: Privacy, Brain Development, and the Law. *Journal of the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law*, *44*(3), 313–321.

Coyne, S. M., Radesky, J., Collier, K. M., Gentile, D. A., Linder, J. R., Nathanson, A. I., … Rogers, J. (2017). Parenting and Digital Media. *Pediatrics*, *140*(Supplement 2), 112–116. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1758N

del Vecchio, P. (2018). The Good News About Preventing Adolescent Depression. *Prevention Science*, *19*(S1), 112–114. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-017-0860-7

Goel, V. (2013, October 16). *Facebook Eases Privacy Rules for Teenagers*. The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/17/technology/facebook-changes-privacy-policy-for-teenagers.html.

Karim, F., Oyewande, A., Abdalla, L. F., Ehsanullah, R. C., & Khan, S. (2020). Social Media Use and its Connection to Mental Health: A Systematic Review. *Cureus*, *12*(6), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.8627

Keles, B., McCrae, N., & Grealish, A. (2019). A Systematic Review: The Influence of Social Media On Depression, Anxiety and Psychological Distress in Adolescents. *International Journal of Adolescence and Youth*, *25*(1), 79–93. https://doi.org/10.1080/02673843.2019.1590851

Lenhart, A., Ling, R., Campbell, S., & Purcell, K. (2010, April 20). *Teens and Mobile Phones*. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2010/04/20/chapter-two-how-phones-are-used-with-friends-what-they-can-do-and-how-teens-use-them/.

Livingstone, S., & Brake, D. R. (2009). On the Rapid Rise of Social Networking Sites: New Findings and Policy Implications. *Children & Society*, *24*(1), 75–83. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1099-0860.2009.00243.x

Martins, M. V., Formiga, A., Santos, C., Sousa, D., Resende, C., Campos, R., … Ferreira, S. (2020). Adolescent Internet Addiction – Role of Parental Control and Adolescent Behaviours. *International Journal of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine*, *7*(3), 116–120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpam.2019.12.003

Mathews, S. P., & George, S. (2013). Growth and Future of Social Media. *International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology*, *2*(12), 3177–3183.

Moreno, M. A., Parks, M. R., Zimmerman, F. J., Brito, T. E., & Christakis, D. A. (2009). Display of Health Risk Behaviors on MySpace by Adolescents. *Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine*, *163*(1), 27–34. https://doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2008.528

O’Reilly, M. (2020). Social Media and Adolescent Mental Health: the Good, the Bad and the Ugly. *Journal of Mental Health*, *29*(2), 200–206. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638237.2020.1714007

Padilla-Walker, L. M., Coyne, S. M., Kroff, S. L., & Memmott-Elison, M. K. (2017). The Protective Role of Parental Media Monitoring Style from Early to Late Adolescence. *Journal of Youth and Adolescence*, *47*(2), 445–459. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-017-0722-4

Pantic, I. (2014). Online Social Networking and Mental Health. *Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking*, *17*(10), 652–657. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2014.0070

Reid, D., & Weigle, P. (2014). Social Media Use Among Adolescents: Benefits and Risks. *Adolescent Psychiatry*, *4*(2), 73–80. https://doi.org/10.2174/221067660402140709115810

Spies Shapiro, L. A., & Margolin, G. (2013). Growing Up Wired: Social Networking Sites and Adolescent Psychosocial Development. *Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review*, *17*(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10567-013-0135-1

Subrahmanyam, K., & Greenfield, P. (2008). Online Communication and Adolescent Relationships. *The Future of Children*, *18*(1), 119–146. https://doi.org/10.1353/foc.0.0006

Uhls, Y. T., Ellison, N. B., & Subrahmanyam, K. (2017). Benefits and Costs of Social Media in Adolescence. *Pediatrics*, *140*(Supplement 2), 67–70. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1758E

Vidal, C., Lhaksampa, T., Miller, L., & Platt, R. (2020). Social Media Use and Depression in Adolescents: A Scoping Review. *International Review of Psychiatry*, *32*(3), 235–253. https://doi.org/10.1080/09540261.2020.1720623

Windler, C., Clair, M., Long, C., Boyle, L., & Radovic, A. (2019). Role of Moderators on Engagement of Adolescents With Depression or Anxiety in a Social Media Intervention: Content Analysis of Web-Based Interactions. *JMIR Mental Health*, *6*(9), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.2196/13467
